"Changing the Primal" Design Notes (#282)
JuliaDiff/ChainRulesCore.jl: docs/src/design/changing_the_primal.md

It also works without issue.
#TODO should I actually just include logistic sigmoid a second example though out, and write its code next the the code for `sin`?

Now let's consider why we implement `rrules` like this in the first place.
One key reason, [^3] is to allow us to insert our domain knowledge to do better than the AD would do just by breaking everything down into `+` and `*` etc.
What insights do we have about `sin` and `cos`?
Here is one:
```julia
julia> @btime sin(x) setup=(x=rand());
  3.838 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)

julia> @btime cos(x) setup=(x=rand());
  4.795 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)

julia> 3.838 + 4.795
8.633

julia> @btime sincos(x) setup=(x=rand());
  6.028 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)
```
It is \~30%[^4] faster to compute `sin` and `cos` at the same time via `sincos` than it is to compute them one after the other.
How can we incorporate this insight into our system?
We know that we can compute the `cos(x)` at the same time as the `sin(x)` is computed in primal, because it only depends on `x` --- we don't need to know `ȳ`.

> but there is no-where to put it that is accessible both to the primal pass, and the gradient pass code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But there is nowhere to put it that is accessible both to the primal pass and the gradient pass code.
```

> What if we introduced some variable called `intermediates` that is also record onto the tape during the primal pass?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if we introduced some variable called `intermediates` that is also recorded onto the tape during the primal pass?
```

> We would need to be able to modify the primal pass to do this, so we can actually put the data into the `intermediates`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would need to be able to modify the primal pass to do this, so that we can actually put the data into the `intermediates`.
```

> So we will introduce a function: `augmented_primal`, that will return the primal output, plus the `intermediates` that we want to reuse in the gradient pass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we will introduce a function: `augmented_primal`, that will return the primal output plus the `intermediates` that we want to reuse in the gradient pass.
```

> Then we will make our AD system replace calls to the primal with calls to the `augmented_primal` of the primal function; and take care of all the bookkeeping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we will make our AD system replace calls to the primal with calls to the `augmented_primal` of the primal function and take care of all the bookkeeping.
```

So that would look like:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
y, intermediates = augmented_primal(f, x)
x̄ = pullback_at(f, x, y, ȳ, intermediates)
```

Let's try writing this now:
```julia
y = sin(x)
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, (; cx=cx)  # use a NamedTuple for the intermediates
end

pullback_at(::typeof(sin), x, y, ȳ, intermediates) = ȳ * intermediates.cx
```

Cool!
That lets us do what we wanted.

> We net deceased the time it takes to run the primal and gradient passes.

Reviewer 2: Typo: deceased->decreased

Author: ```suggestion
We net decreased the time it takes to run the primal and gradient passes.
```

We have now demonstrated the title question of why we needed to be able to modify the primal pass.
We will go into that more later, and have some more examples of use.

> But first lets continue to see how we go from that `augmented_primal` _ `pullback_at` to [`rrule`](@ref).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But first let's continue to see how we go from that `augmented_primal` to `pullback_at` to [`rrule`](@ref).
```

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure that what the underscore here was for

Author: weird typo

One thing we notice when looking at `pullback_at` is it really is starting to have a lot of arguments.
It had a fair few already, and now we are adding `intermediates` as well.
Not to mention this is a fairly simple function, only 1 input, no keyword arguments.
Furthermore, we don't even use all of them all the time.
The original new code for pulling back `sin` no longer needs the `x`, and it never needed `y` (though `sigmoid` does).

> Having all this extra stuff means that the `pullback_at` function signature is long, and we are putting a bucnh of extra stuff on the tape, using more memory.

Reviewer 2: bucnh->bunch

Author: ```suggestion
Having all this extra stuff means that the `pullback_at` function signature is long, and we are putting a bunch of extra stuff on the tape, using more memory.
```

What if we generalized the idea of the `intermediate` named tuple, and had a struct that just held anything we might want put on the tape.
```julia
struct PullbackMemory{P, S}
  primal_function::P
  state::S
end
# convenience constructor:
Memory(primal_function; state...) = PullbackMemory(primal_function, state)
# convenience accessor so that `m.x` is same as `m.state.x`
Base.getproperty(m::PullbackMemory, propname) = getproperty(getfield(m, :state), propname)
```

So changing our API we have:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
y, pb = augmented_primal(f, x)
x̄ = pullback_at(pb, ȳ)
```
which is much cleaner.

Let's try writing with this now:
```julia
y = sin(x)
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; cx=cx)
end

pullback_at(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(sin)}, ȳ) = ȳ * pb.cx
```

I think that looks pretty nice.

> One way we could make it look a bit nicer for using, is if the `PullbackMemory` was actually a callable object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way we could make it look a bit nicer for usage is if the `PullbackMemory` was actually a callable object,
```

We now have a object (`pb`) that acts on the cotangent of the output of the primal (`ȳ`) to give us the cotangent of the input of the primal function (`x̄`).
_`pb` is not just the **memory** of state required for the `pullback`, it **is** the pullback._

We have one final thing to do.
Lets think about make the code easy to modify.
Lets go back and think about the changes we would have to make to swap to using `sincos` from our original `sin` then `cos` way of writing.
To rewrite that original formulation in the new pullback form we have:
```julia
y = sin(x)
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y = sin(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; x=x)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory)(ȳ) = ȳ * cos(pb.x)
```
To go from that to:
```julia
y = sin(x)
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; cx=cx)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory)(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.cx
```
we need to make a series of changes.
We need to update what work is done in the primal to compute `cx`.
We need to update what was stored in the `PullbackMemory`.
And we need to update the the function that applies the pullback so it uses the new thing that was stored.

> It's important these thing all stay in sync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important these parts all stay in sync.
```

> It's not to bad for this simple example with just 1 thing to remember.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's not too bad for this simple example with just one thing to remember.
```

For more complicated multi-argument functions, like will be talked about below, you often end up needing to remember half a dozen things, like sizes and indices relating to each input/output.
So it gets a little more fiddly to make sure you remember all the things you need to a and give them same name in both places.
_Is there a way we can automatically just have all the things we use remembered for us?_

Surprisingly for such a specific request, there actually is.
This is a closure.
A closure in julia is a callable structure, that automatically contains a field for every object from its parent scope that is used in its body.
There are [incredible ways to abuse this](https://invenia.github.io/blog/2019/10/30/julialang-features-part-1#closures-give-us-classic-object-oriented-programming); but here we can in-fact use closures exactly as they are intended.

> Replacing `PullbackMemory` with a closure that works the same lets us avoid manually controlling what is remembers, _and_ lets us avoid writing separately the call overload.

Reviewer 2: "is remembers" should be "it remembers" or maybe "is remembered"?

Author: ```suggestion
Replacing `PullbackMemory` with a closure that works the same lets us avoid manually controlling what it remembers, _and_ lets us avoid writing separately the call overload.
```

> Replacing `PullbackMemory` with a closure that works the same lets us avoid manually controlling what is remembers, _and_ lets us avoid writing separately the call overload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replacing `PullbackMemory` with a closure that works the same way lets us avoid having to manually control what is remembered, _and_ lets us avoid separately writing the call overload.
```

So we have for `sin`:
```julia
y = sin(x)
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)

>   pb = ȳ -> cx * ȳ  # pullback closure. closes over `cs`

Reviewer 2: Typo in comment 'cs'->'cx'

Author: ```suggestion
  pb = ȳ -> cx * ȳ  # pullback closure. closes over `cx`
```

  return y, pb
end
```

Our `augmented_primal` is now with-in spitting distance of `rrule`.
All that is left is a rename, and some extra conventions around multiple outputs and gradients with respect to callable objects.

This has been a journey into how we get to [`rrule`](@ref) as it is defined in `ChainRulesCore`.
We started with an unaugmented primal function and a `pullback_at` function that only saw the inputs and outputs of the primal.
We realized a key limitation of this was that we couldn't share computational work between the primal and and gradient passes.

> To solve this we introduced the notation of a some shared `intermediate` that is shared from the primal to the pullback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve this we introduced the notation of a some `intermediate` that is shared from the primal to the pullback.
```

We successively improved that idea, first by making it a type that held everything that is needed for the pullback: the `PullbackMemory`.

> Which we then made callable --- so it  was itself the pullback._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which we then made callable --- so it  was itself the pullback.
```

Under our formulation above, those primal inputs/outputs are shared information just like any other.
Beyond this there are a number other decent applications.

### `getindex`
In julia (and many other numerical languages) indexing can take many more arguments than simply a couple of integers.
For example, passing in boolean masking arrays (logical indexing), passing in ranges to do slices, etc.
Converting them to plain integers, arrays of integers, and ranges is `Base.to_indices` is the first thing that `getindex` does.
It then re-calls `getindex` with these simpler types to get the result.

The result of pulling back the `getindex` operation is always an array that is all zeros,
except for the elements that are selected, which are set to the appropriate sensitivities being pulled back.
So identify which actual positions in the array are being gotten/set is common work to both primal and gradient computations.
We really don't want to deal with fancy indexing types during the pullback, because there are weird edge cases like indexing in such a way that the same element is output twice (and thus we have 2 sensitivities we need to add to it).

> We can pull the `to_indices` out of the primal computation and remember the plain indexes to used to set them during the pullback.

Reviewer 2: "to used to" -> "used to"

Author: ```suggestion
We can pull the `to_indices` out of the primal computation and remember the plain indexes used, then can reuse them to set gradients during the pullback.
```

See the [code for this in ChainRules.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/blob/v0.7.49/src/rulesets/Base/indexing.jl)

### `exp(::Matrix)`
[Matrix Functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_function) are functions that are generalized to operate on matrixes rather than scalars.
Note that this is distinct from simply element-wise application of the function to the matrix's elements.
[Matrix Exponential](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_exponential) `exp(::Matrix)` is one particularly important matrix function.

[Al-Mohy, Awad H. and Higham, Nicholas J. (2009) _Computing the Fréchet Derivative of the Matrix Exponential, with an application to Condition Number Estimation_. SIAM Journal On Matrix Analysis and Applications., 30 (4). pp. 1639-1657. ISSN 1095-7162](http://eprints.maths.manchester.ac.uk/1218/), published a method for this.
It is pretty complex and very cool.

> To quote it's abstract (emphasis mine):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To quote its abstract (emphasis mine):
```

It will still be accurate because the current implementation is accurate, but it will be different.
It is [our argument](https://forums.swift.org/t/agreement-of-valuewithdifferential-and-value/31869) that in general this should be considered acceptable.
As long as it is in general about as accurate as the unaugmented primal it should be acceptable.
E.g. it might overshoot for some values the unaugmented primal undershoots for.

### `eigvals`
`eigvals` is a real case where the algorithm for the augmented primal, and the original primal _is already different today_.
To compute the pullback of `eigvals` you need to know not only the eigenvalues, but also the eigenvectors.
the `eigen` function computes both, so that is used in augmented primal.
See the [code for this in ChainRules.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/blob/v0.7.49/src/rulesets/LinearAlgebra/factorization.jl#L209-L218).
If we could not compute remember the eigenvectors in the primal pass we would have to call `eigen` in the gradient pass anyway, and fully recomputed eigenvectors and eigenvalues; over doubling the total work.

> However, if you trace this down, it actually used a different algorithm.

Reviewer 2: used->uses

Author: ```suggestion
However, if you trace this down, it actually uses a different algorithm.
```

are as far as `Float64` is concerned a very real difference.

### Matrix Division
Roughly speaking:
`Y=A\B` is the function that finds the least-square solution to `YA ≈ B`.
When solving such a system, the efficient way to do so is to factorize `A` into an appropriate factorized form such as `Cholesky` or `QR` etc,
then perform the `\` operation on the factorized form.
The pullback of `A\B` with respect to `B` is `Ȳ-> A' \ Ȳ`.
It should be noted that that involves computing the factorization of `A'` (the adjoint of `A`).
In this computation the factorization of the original `A` can reused.
Doing so can give a 4x speed-up.

We don't have this in ChainRules.jl yet, because Julia is missing some definitions of `adjoint` of factorizations ([JuliaLang/julia#38293](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/38293)).
I have been promised them for Julia v1.7 though.
You can see what the code would look like in [PR #302](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/pull/302).

# Conclusion
This document has explained why [`rrule`](@ref) is the way it is.
In particular it has highlighted why the primal computation is able to be changed from simply calling the function.

> Futher, it has explain where `rrule` returns a closure.

Reviewer 2: explain->explained, and maybe where->why?

Author: ```suggestion
Futher, it has explained why `rrule` returns a closure for the pullback, rather than it being a seperate function.
```

[^1]:
    I am not just picking on Nabla randomly.
    Many of the core developers of ChainRules worked on Nabla prior.
    It's a good AD, but ChainRules incorporates lessons learned from working on Nabla.

[^2]: which may be an explicit tape, or an implicit tape that is actually incorporated into generated code (ala Zygote)

[^3]:
    Another key reason is if the operations is a primitive that is not defined in terms of more basic operations.
    In many languages this is the case for `sin`; where the actual implementation is in some separate `libm.so`.
    But actually [`sin` in Julia is defined in terms of a polynomial](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/blob/caeaceff8af97565334f35309d812566183ec687/base/special/trig.jl).
    It's fairly vanilla julia code.
    It shouldn't be too hard for an AD that only knows about basic operations like `+` and `*` to AD through it.
    Though that will incur something that looks a lot like truncation error (in apparent violation of Griewank and Walther's 0th Rule of AD).
    In anycase, that is another discussion, for another day.

[^4]:

> Sure, this is small-fries and depending on julia version might just get solved by the optimizer[^5], but go with it for the sake of example.

Reviewer 3: > optimizer

the compiler optimization pass?

Reviewer 3: Also for some reason this note is displayed in the conclusion body for me

Author: Is that where it ended uop. Weird

Reviewer 3: yes it looks like this in the preview:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7623090/105710523-8b3f4c80-5f17-11eb-93a7-65d027332258.png)

> Sure, this is small-fries and depending on julia version might just get solved by the optimizer[^5], but go with it for the sake of example.

Author: ```suggestion
    Sure, this is small-fries and depending on julia version might just get solved by the optimizer[^5], but go with it for the sake of example.
```

[^5]:
  To be precise this is very likely to be solved by the optimizer inlining both and then performing common subexpression elimination, with the result that it generates the code for `sincos` just form having `sin` and `cos` inside the same function.
  However, this actually doesn't apply in the case of AD as it is not possible to inline code called in the gradient pass into the primal pass -- those are seperate functions called at very different times.

>   This is something [opaque closures](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/37849) should help solve.

Author: For some reason these two are not showing up in the rendered docs

>   To be precise this is very likely to be solved by the optimizer inlining both and then performing common subexpression elimination, with the result that it generates the code for `sincos` just form having `sin` and `cos` inside the same function.
>   However, this actually doesn't apply in the case of AD as it is not possible to inline code called in the gradient pass into the primal pass -- those are seperate functions called at very different times.
>   This is something [opaque closures](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/37849) should help solve.

Author: ```suggestion
    To be precise this is very likely to be solved by the optimizer inlining both and then performing common subexpression elimination, with the result that it generates the code for `sincos` just form having `sin` and `cos` inside the same function.
    However, this actually doesn't apply in the case of AD as it is not possible to inline code called in the gradient pass into the primal pass -- those are seperate functions called at very different times.
    This is something [opaque closures](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/pull/37849) should help solve.
```

# Design Notes: Why can you change the primal computation?
#TODO generalize intro/title to ask why `rrule` is how it is, and in particular about changing primal

These design notes are to help you understand why ChainRules allows the primal computation to be changed.
We will focus this discussion on reverse mode and `rrule`, though the same also applies to forwards mode and `frule`.
In fact, it has a particular use in forward mode for efficiently calculating the pushforward of a differential equation solve via expanding the system of equations to also include the derivatives, and solving all at once.

> In forward mode it is related to the fusing of `frule` and `pushforward`.

Author: for primal `y=f(x)` we have a pushfward given by  is: ` ẏ=pushforward(ẋ)
It can be defused out of `frule`
via:
```julia
function linearize(f, x...)
    function pushfoward(ẋ...)
        y, ẏ = frule(ẋ, f, x...)
        return ẏ
    end
    return pushfoward
end
```

Now if the optimizer runs well-enough, we would be able to be JAXish.

The defination of the pushforward is given in the main page of the docs.
Since this is kind of dev-docs, I don't think we need to give it again?

We would need to be able to modify the primal pass to do this, so that we can actually put the data into the `intermediates`.
So we will introduce a function: `augmented_primal`, that will return the primal output plus the `intermediates` that we want to reuse in the gradient pass.
Then we will make our AD system replace calls to the primal with calls to the `augmented_primal` of the primal function and take care of all the bookkeeping.
So that would look like:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
y, intermediates = augmented_primal(f, x)
x̄ = pullback_at(f, x, y, ȳ, intermediates)
```

Let's try writing this now for `sin`
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, (; cx=cx)  # use a NamedTuple for the intermediates
end

pullback_at(::typeof(sin), x, y, ȳ, intermediates) = ȳ * intermediates.cx
```
and for the logistic sigmoid:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)
  y = ex/(1 + ex)
  return y, (; ex=ex)  # use a NamedTuple for the intermediates
end

pullback_at(::typeof(σ), x, y, ȳ, intermediates) = ȳ * y /(1 + intermediates.ex)
```

Cool!
That lets us do what we wanted.

> We net decreased the time it takes to run the primal and gradient passes.

Author: I am not sure.
I kind of intend the above as illustrative examples.
They get the point across that this is a thing we might like to do, regardless of if they are are actually effective

We have now demonstrated the title question of why we needed to be able to modify the primal pass.
We will go into that more later, and have some more examples of use.
But first let's continue to see how we go from that `augmented_primal` to `pullback_at` to [`rrule`](@ref).

One thing we notice when looking at `pullback_at` is it really is starting to have a lot of arguments.
It had a fair few already, and now we are adding `intermediates` as well.
Not to mention this is a fairly simple function, only 1 input, no keyword arguments.
Furthermore, we don't even use all of them all the time.
The original new code for pulling back `sin` no longer needs the `x`, and it never needed `y` (though `sigmoid` does).

> Having all this extra stuff means that the `pullback_at` function signature is long, and we are putting a bunch of extra stuff on the tape, using more memory.

Author: ```suggestion
The function signature for `pullback_at` was already rather long with the primal inputs and outputs and the sensitivity.
Now it is even longer since we added `intermediates`.
Further, storing all all those things on the tape is using up extra memory.
```

What if we generalized the idea of the `intermediate` named tuple, and had a struct that just held anything we might want put on the tape.
```julia
struct PullbackMemory{P, S}
  primal_function::P
  state::S
end
# convenience constructor:
Memory(primal_function; state...) = PullbackMemory(primal_function, state)
# convenience accessor so that `m.x` is same as `m.state.x`
Base.getproperty(m::PullbackMemory, propname) = getproperty(getfield(m, :state), propname)
```

So changing our API we have:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
y, pb = augmented_primal(f, x)
x̄ = pullback_at(pb, ȳ)
```
which is much cleaner.

Let's try writing with this for `sin`:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; cx=cx)
end

pullback_at(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(sin)}, ȳ) = ȳ * pb.cx
```
and for the logistic sigmoid:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)
  y = ex/(1 + ex)
  return y, PullbackMemory(σ; y=y, ex=ex)
end

pullback_at(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)}, ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y/(1 + pb.ex)
```

I think that looks pretty nice.

> One way we could make it look a bit nicer for usage is if the `PullbackMemory` was actually a callable object,
> since `pullback_at` only has the 2 arguments,
> and conceptually the `PullbackMemory` is a more fixed thing -- it is fully determined by the end of the primal pass,
> then during the reverse pass the argument `ȳ` is successively computed.

Reviewer 4: Exactly 1 sentence per line. And can this be broken into multiple sentences?
```suggestion
One way we could make it look a bit nicer for usage is if the `PullbackMemory` was actually a callable object, since `pullback_at` only has the 2 arguments, and conceptually the `PullbackMemory` is a more fixed thing -- it is fully determined by the end of the primal pass, then during the reverse pass the argument `ȳ` is successively computed.
```

Author: ```suggestion
One way we could make it look a bit nicer for usage is if the `PullbackMemory` was actually a callable object. `pullback_at` only has the 2 arguments.
Conceptually the `PullbackMemory` is a fixed thing it the contents of the tape for a particular operation.
It is fully determined by the end of the primal pass.
The during the gradient (reverse) pass the `PullbackMemory` is used to successively compute the `ȳ`  argument.
So it makes sense to have `PullbackMemory` being a callable object that acts on the sensitivity.
```

We can do that via call overloading:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
y, pb = augmented_primal(f, x)
x̄ = pb(ȳ)
```
and for `sin`:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; cx=cx)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory)(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.cx
```
and for the logistic sigmoid:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)
  y = ex/(1 + ex)
  return y, PullbackMemory(σ; y=y, ex=ex)
end

(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)})(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y/(1 + pb.ex)
```

Those looking closely will spot what we have done here.
We now have a object (`pb`) that acts on the cotangent of the output of the primal (`ȳ`) to give us the cotangent of the input of the primal function (`x̄`).
_`pb` is not just the **memory** of state required for the `pullback`, it **is** the pullback._

We have one final thing to do.
Lets think about make the code easy to modify.

> Lets go back and think about the changes we would have to make to this swap from our original way of writing.

Author: ```suggestion
Let's go back and think about the changes we would have make to go from our original way of writing that only used the inputs/outputs, to one that used the intermediate state.
```

For `sin` to rewrite that original formulation in the new pullback form we have:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y = sin(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; x=x)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory)(ȳ) = ȳ * cos(pb.x)
```
To go from that to:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; cx=cx)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory)(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.cx
```

and for logistic sigmoid, the original would have been:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  y = σ(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(σ; y=y, x=x)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)})(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y * σ(-pb.x)
```
to get to:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)
  y = ex/(1 + ex)
  return y, PullbackMemory(σ; y=y, ex=ex)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)})(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y/(1 + pb.ex)
```

> (NB: there is actually a further optimization that can be made to the logistic sigmoid, to avoid remembering two things and just remember one. As an exercise to the reader, consider how the code would need to be changed and where.)

Reviewer 4: Perhaps make this an admonition?

> (NB: there is actually a further optimization that can be made to the logistic sigmoid, to avoid remembering two things and just remember one. As an exercise to the reader, consider how the code would need to be changed and where.)

Author: maybe?

_Is there a way we can automatically just have all the things we use remembered for us?_

Surprisingly for such a specific request, there actually is.
This is a closure.
A closure in Julia is a callable structure, that automatically contains a field for every object from its parent scope that is used in its body.
There are [incredible ways to abuse this](https://invenia.github.io/blog/2019/10/30/julialang-features-part-1#closures-give-us-classic-object-oriented-programming); but here we can in-fact use closures exactly as they are intended.
Replacing `PullbackMemory` with a closure that works the same way lets us avoid having to manually control what is remembered, _and_ lets us avoid separately writing the call overload.
So we have for `sin`:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  pb = ȳ -> cx * ȳ  # pullback closure. closes over `cx`
  return y, pb
end
```
and for logistic sigmoid:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)
  y = ex/(1 + ex)
  pb = ȳ -> ȳ * y/(1 + ex)  # pullback closure. closes over `y` and `ex`
  return y, pb
end
```
This is pretty clean now.

> Our `augmented_primal` is now with-in spitting distance of `rrule`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our `augmented_primal` is now within spitting distance of `rrule`.
```

> All that is left is a rename, and some extra conventions around multiple outputs and gradients with respect to callable objects.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All that is left is a rename and some extra conventions around multiple outputs and gradients with respect to callable objects.
```

This has been a journey into how we get to [`rrule`](@ref) as it is defined in `ChainRulesCore`.
We started with an unaugmented primal function and a `pullback_at` function that only saw the inputs and outputs of the primal.

> We realized a key limitation of this was that we couldn't share computational work between the primal and and gradient passes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We realized a key limitation of this was that we couldn't share computational work between the prima and gradient passes.
```

Author: `prima`?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We realized a key limitation of this was that we couldn't share computational work between the primal and gradient passes.
```

> To solve this we introduced the notation of a some `intermediate` that is shared from the primal to the pullback.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To solve this we introduced the notation of some `intermediate` that is shared from the primal to the pullback.
```

> We successively improved that idea, first by making it a type that held everything that is needed for the pullback: the `PullbackMemory`.
> Which we then made callable --- so it  was itself the pullback.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We successively improved that idea, first by making it a type that held everything that is needed for the pullback: the `PullbackMemory`, which we then made callable, so it was itself the pullback.
```

Finally, we replaced that separate callable structure with a closure, which kept everything in one place and made it more convenient.

## More Shared Work Examples

> `sin` and the logistic sigmoid are a nice simple examples of when it is useful to share work between primal and the pullback.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`sin` and the logistic sigmoid are nice, simple examples of when it is useful to share work between the primal and the pullback.
```

There are many others though.

> It is actually surprising that in so many cases it is reasonable to write the rules where the only shared information between the primal and the pullback is the primal inputs  (like our original `sin`), or primal outputs (like our original logistic sigmoid).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is actually surprising that in so many cases it is reasonable to write the rules where the only shared information between the primal and the pullback is the primal inputs (like our original `sin`), or primal outputs (like our original logistic sigmoid).
```

Under our formulation above, those primal inputs/outputs are shared information just like any other.

> Beyond this there are a number other decent applications.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Beyond this, there are a number of other decent applications.
```

### `getindex`

> In Julia (and many other numerical languages) indexing can take many more arguments than simply a couple of integers.
> For example, passing in boolean masking arrays (logical indexing), passing in ranges to do slices, etc.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Julia (and many other numerical languages) indexing can take many more arguments than simply a couple of integers, such as boolean masking arrays (logical indexing), ranges for slices, etc.
```

> Converting them to plain integers, arrays of integers, and ranges is `Base.to_indices` is the first thing that `getindex` does.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Converting the arguments to plain integers, arrays of integers, and ranges with `Base.to_indices` is the first thing that `getindex` does.
```

It then re-calls `getindex` with these simpler types to get the result.

> The result of pulling back the `getindex` operation is always an array that is all zeros,
> except for the elements that are selected, which are set to the appropriate sensitivities being pulled back.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The result of pulling back the `getindex` operation is always an array that is all zeros, except for the elements that are selected, which are set to the appropriate sensitivities being pulled back.
```

> So identify which actual positions in the array are being gotten/set is common work to both primal and gradient computations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To identify which actual positions in the array are being gotten/set is common work to both primal and gradient computations.
```

We really don't want to deal with fancy indexing types during the pullback, because there are weird edge cases like indexing in such a way that the same element is output twice (and thus we have 2 sensitivities we need to add to it).
We can pull the `to_indices` out of the primal computation and remember the plain indexes used, then can reuse them to set gradients during the pullback.

See the [code for this in ChainRules.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/blob/v0.7.49/src/rulesets/Base/indexing.jl)

> ### `exp(::Matrix)`

Reviewer 4: I am working on a page about differentiating matrix functions that this can link to. I think even with that, it makes sense to keep this here.

> [Matrix Functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_function) are functions that are generalized to operate on matrixes rather than scalars.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Matrix Functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_function) are generalizations of scalar functions to operate on matrices.
```

Note that this is distinct from simply element-wise application of the function to the matrix's elements.

> [Matrix Exponential](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_exponential) `exp(::Matrix)` is one particularly important matrix function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The [Matrix Exponential](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrix_exponential) `exp(::Matrix)` is a particularly important matrix function.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> [Al-Mohy, Awad H. and Higham, Nicholas J. (2009) _Computing the Fréchet Derivative of the Matrix Exponential, with an application to Condition Number Estimation_. SIAM Journal On Matrix Analysis and Applications., 30 (4). pp. 1639-1657. ISSN 1095-7162](http://eprints.maths.manchester.ac.uk/1218/), published a method for this.

Reviewer 4: Should this citation be in a footnote?

Author: good idea

It is pretty complex and very cool.
To quote its abstract (emphasis mine):

> The algorithm is derived from the scaling and squaring method by differentiating the Padé approximants and the squaring recurrence, **re-using quantities computed during the evaluation of the Padé approximant**, and intertwining the recurrences in the squaring phase.

Julia does in fact use a Padé approximation to compute `exp(::Matrix)`.
So we can extract the code for that into our augmented primal, and add remembering the intermediate quantities that are to be used.
See the [code for this in ChainRules.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/blob/v0.7.49/src/rulesets/LinearAlgebra/matfun.jl)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> An interesting thing here that may be of concern to some:

Reviewer 4: Can we be more specific than "thing"?

Author: ```suggestion
An interesting scenario here that may be of concern to some:
```

> if Julia changes the algorithm it it uses to compute `exp(::Matrix)` then during an AD primal pass, it will continue to use the old Padé approximation based algorithm.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
if Julia changes the algorithm it uses to compute `exp(::Matrix)`, then during an AD primal pass, it will continue to use the old Padé approximation based algorithm.
```

> This is a real thing that might happen, there are many other algorithms that can compute the matrix exponential.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This may actually happen, as there are many other algorithms that can compute the matrix exponential.
```

Reviewer 4: However, the current algorithm has been the "recommended" algorithm for over a decade.

> Further, perhaps there might be an improvement to the exact coefficient or cut-offs used by julia's current Padé approximation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Further, perhaps there might be an improvement to the exact coefficient or cut-offs used by Julia's current Padé approximation.
```

> This is not a breaking change on Julia's behalf: [exact floating point numerical values are not generally considered part of the SemVer-bound API](http://colprac.sciml.ai/#changes-that-are-not-considered-breaking).

Reviewer 4: "on Julia's behalf" phrasing seems strange

Author: ```suggestion
If Julia made this change it wopuld not be considered breaking.
[Exact floating point numerical values are not generally considered part of the SemVer-bound API](http://colprac.sciml.ai/#changes-that-are-not-considered-breaking).
```

> Rather only the general accuracy of the computed value relative to the true mathematical value (e.g. for common scalar operations Julia promises 1ULP).

Reviewer 4: Can you elaborate on what 1ULP means?

Author: I really wish I could.
I actually don't know, just that it is how we measure accuracy.
But I can cross link to wikipedia.

```suggestion
Rather only the general accuracy of the computed value relative to the true mathematical value (e.g. for common scalar operations Julia promises 1 [ULP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_in_the_last_place)).
```

> This change will result in the output of the AD primal pass not being exactly equal to that that would be seen from just running the primal code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This change will result in the output of the AD primal pass not being exactly equal to what would be seen from just running the primal code.
```

It will still be accurate because the current implementation is accurate, but it will be different.

> It is [our argument](https://forums.swift.org/t/agreement-of-valuewithdifferential-and-value/31869) that in general this should be considered acceptable.
> As long as it is in general about as accurate as the unaugmented primal it should be acceptable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is [our argument](https://forums.swift.org/t/agreement-of-valuewithdifferential-and-value/31869) that in general this should be considered acceptable, as long as the AD primal pass is in general about as accurate as the unaugmented primal.
```

> E.g. it might overshoot for some values the unaugmented primal undershoots for.

Reviewer 4: This seems redundant.
```suggestion
```

Author: are you sure?

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

### `eigvals`

> `eigvals` is a real case where the algorithm for the augmented primal, and the original primal _is already different today_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`eigvals` is a real case where the algorithm for the augmented primal and the original primal _is already different today_.
```

> To compute the pullback of `eigvals` you need to know not only the eigenvalues, but also the eigenvectors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To compute the pullback of `eigvals` you need to know not only the eigenvalues but also the eigenvectors.
```

> the `eigen` function computes both, so that is used in augmented primal.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `eigen` function computes both, so that is used in the augmented primal.
```

See the [code for this in ChainRules.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/blob/v0.7.49/src/rulesets/LinearAlgebra/factorization.jl#L209-L218).

> If we could not compute remember the eigenvectors in the primal pass we would have to call `eigen` in the gradient pass anyway, and fully recomputed eigenvectors and eigenvalues; over doubling the total work.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If we could not compute and remember the eigenvectors in the primal pass, we would have to call `eigen` in the gradient pass anyway and fully recompute eigenvectors and eigenvalues, more than doubling the total work.
```

However, if you trace this down, it actually uses a different algorithm.

> `eigvals` basically wraps `LAPACK.syevr!('N', ...)`
> which goes through [DSYEVR](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/explore-html/d2/d8a/group__double_s_yeigen_gaeed8a131adf56eaa2a9e5b1e0cce5718.html)
> and eventually calls [DSTERF](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/explore-html/d2/d24/group__aux_o_t_h_e_rcomputational_gaf0616552c11358ae8298d0ac18ac023c.html#gaf0616552c11358ae8298d0ac18ac023c)
> which uses _"Pal-Walker-Kahan variant of the QL or QR algorithm."_ to compute eigenvalues

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`eigvals` basically wraps `LAPACK.syevr!('N', ...)`, which goes through [DSYEVR](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/explore-html/d2/d8a/group__double_s_yeigen_gaeed8a131adf56eaa2a9e5b1e0cce5718.html) and eventually calls [DSTERF](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/explore-html/d2/d24/group__aux_o_t_h_e_rcomputational_gaf0616552c11358ae8298d0ac18ac023c.html#gaf0616552c11358ae8298d0ac18ac023c), which uses _"Pal-Walker-Kahan variant of the QL or QR algorithm."_ to compute eigenvalues
```

> In contrast, `eigen` wraps `LAPACK.syevr!('V',...)`
> which also goes through [DSYEVR](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/explore-html/d2/d8a/group__double_s_yeigen_gaeed8a131adf56eaa2a9e5b1e0cce5718.html)
> but eventually calls [DSTEMR](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/explore-html/da/dba/group__double_o_t_h_e_rcomputational_ga14daa3ac4e7b5d3712244f54ce40cc92.html#ga14daa3ac4e7b5d3712244f54ce40cc92)
> which calculates eigenvalues _"either by bisection or the dqds algorithm."_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In contrast, `eigen` wraps `LAPACK.syevr!('V',...)` which also goes through [DSYEVR](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/explore-html/d2/d8a/group__double_s_yeigen_gaeed8a131adf56eaa2a9e5b1e0cce5718.html) but eventually calls [DSTEMR](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/explore-html/da/dba/group__double_o_t_h_e_rcomputational_ga14daa3ac4e7b5d3712244f54ce40cc92.html#ga14daa3ac4e7b5d3712244f54ce40cc92), which calculates eigenvalues _"either by bisection or the dqds algorithm."_.
```

Both of these are very good algorithms.
LAPACK has had decades of work by experts and is one of the most trusted libraries for linear algebra.
But they are different algorithms that give different results.

> The differences in practices are around $10^{-15}$, which while very small on absolute terms
> are as far as `Float64` is concerned a very real difference.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The differences in practice are around $10^{-15}$, which while very small on absolute terms are as far as `Float64` is concerned a very real difference.
```

### Matrix Division
Roughly speaking:
`Y=A\B` is the function that finds the least-square solution to `YA ≈ B`.

> When solving such a system, the efficient way to do so is to factorize `A` into an appropriate factorized form such as `Cholesky` or `QR` etc,
> then perform the `\` operation on the factorized form.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When solving such a system, the efficient way to do so is to factorize `A` into an appropriate factorized form such as `Cholesky` or `QR`, then perform the `\` operation on the factorized form.
```

The pullback of `A\B` with respect to `B` is `Ȳ-> A' \ Ȳ`.

> It should be noted that that involves computing the factorization of `A'` (the adjoint of `A`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It should be noted that this involves computing the factorization of `A'` (the adjoint of `A`).
```

In this computation the factorization of the original `A` can reused.
Doing so can give a 4x speed-up.

We don't have this in ChainRules.jl yet, because Julia is missing some definitions of `adjoint` of factorizations ([JuliaLang/julia#38293](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/issues/38293)).

> I have been promised them for Julia v1.7 though.

Reviewer 4: "I": It seems to me that docs like this written by one person that are more like glob posts should have an author listed. Substantial future modifications by other contributors would result in additional authors being added.

Author: ```suggestion
**[@andreasnoack](https://github.com/andreasnoack)** promised them for Julia v1.7 though.
```

Should I just @andreasnoack here?

Author: probably not
```suggestion
We have been promised them for Julia v1.7 though.
```

You can see what the code would look like in [PR #302](https://github.com/JuliaDiff/ChainRules.jl/pull/302).

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

# Conclusion
This document has explained why [`rrule`](@ref) is the way it is.
In particular it has highlighted why the primal computation is able to be changed from simply calling the function.

> Futher, it has explained why `rrule` returns a closure for the pullback, rather than it being a seperate function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Further, it has explained why `rrule` returns a closure for the pullback, rather than it being a separate function.
```

> It has highlighted several places in ChainRules.jl where this has allowed us to have significantly improved performance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It has highlighted several places in ChainRules.jl where this has allowed us to significantly improve performance.
```

Being able to change the primal computation is practically essential for a high performance AD system.

> 
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

[^1]:
    I am not just picking on Nabla randomly.
    Many of the core developers of ChainRules worked on Nabla prior.
    It's a good AD, but ChainRules incorporates lessons learned from working on Nabla.

> [^2]: which may be an explicit tape, or an implicit tape that is actually incorporated into generated code (ala Zygote)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[^2]: which may be an explicit tape or an implicit tape that is actually incorporated into generated code (à la Zygote)
```

[^3]:

>     Another key reason is if the operations is a primitive that is not defined in terms of more basic operations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Another key reason is if the operation is a primitive that is not defined in terms of more basic operations.
```

    In many languages this is the case for `sin`; where the actual implementation is in some separate `libm.so`.

>     But actually [`sin` in Julia is defined in terms of a polynomial](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/blob/caeaceff8af97565334f35309d812566183ec687/base/special/trig.jl).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    But actually `sin` in Julia is [defined in terms of a polynomial](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/blob/caeaceff8af97565334f35309d812566183ec687/base/special/trig.jl).
```

    It's fairly vanilla Julia code.
    It shouldn't be too hard for an AD that only knows about basic operations like `+` and `*` to AD through it.

>     Though that will incur something that looks a lot like truncation error (in apparent violation of Griewank and Walther's 0th Rule of AD).

Reviewer 4: I have no idea what this means? Can you elaborate on it? Or if not, just not make it at all?

Author: Yeah, it belongs in its own discussion.
I will delete

```suggestion
```

>     In anycase, that is another discussion, for another day.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    In any case, that is another discussion for another day.
```

[^4]:

>     Sure, this is small-fries and depending on Julia version might just get solved by the optimizer[^5], but go with it for the sake of example.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Sure, this is small fries and depending on Julia version might just get solved by the optimizer[^5], but go with it for the sake of example.
```

[^5]:

>     To be precise this is very likely to be solved by the optimizer inlining both and then performing common subexpression elimination, with the result that it generates the code for `sincos` just form having `sin` and `cos` inside the same function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    To be precise, this is very likely to be solved by the optimizer inlining both and then performing common subexpression elimination, with the result that it generates the code for `sincos` just from having `sin` and `cos` inside the same function.
```

>     However, this actually doesn't apply in the case of AD as it is not possible to inline code called in the gradient pass into the primal pass -- those are seperate functions called at very different times.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    However, this actually doesn't apply in the case of AD, as it is not possible to inline code called in the gradient pass into the primal pass.
    Those are separate functions called at very different times.
```

# Design Notes: Why can you change the primal computation?

These design notes are to help you understand why ChainRules why [`rrule`](@ref).

> It explains why we have a function, that includes the computation of the primal result, and that returns the pullback as a closure.

Author: ```suggestion
It explains why we have a `rrule` function that returns both the primal result (i.e. the output for the forward pass) and the pullback as a closure.
```

This structure is perhaps surprising to some AD authors, who might expect just a function that performs the pullback.
It is particularly notable that you are able to change the primal computation when defining the `rrule`.
We will illustrate in this document why this is a crucial capacity.

!!! note what about `frule`?
    Discussion here is focused on on reverse mode and `rrule`.
    Similar concerns to apply to to forward mode and `frule`.
    In forward mode these concerns lead to the fusing of the `pushforward` into `frule`.
    All the examples given here also apply in forwards mode.
    In fact in forwards mode there are even more opportunities to take advantage of sharing work between the primal and derivative computations.
    A particularly notable example is in efficiently calculating the pushforward of solving a differential equation via expanding the system of equations to also include the derivatives before solving it.

## The Journey to `rrule`

Let's imagine a different system for rules, one that doesn't let you do this.
This system is what a lot of AD systems have.

> It is what [Nabla.jl](https://github.com/invenia/Nabla.jl/)[^1] had originally.

Reviewer 5: footnotes at end of sentences to avoid breaking flow when reading
```suggestion
It is what [Nabla.jl](https://github.com/invenia/Nabla.jl/) had originally.[^1]
```

We will have a primal (i.e. forward) pass that directly executes the primal function and just records its _inputs_ and its _output_ (as well as the _primal function_ itself) onto the tape.[^2].
Then during the gradient (i.e. reverse) pass it has a function which receives those records from the tape along with the sensitivity of the output, and gives back the sensitivity of the input.
We will call this function `pullback_at`, as it pulls back the sensitivity at a given primal point.
To make this concrete:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
x̄ = pullback_at(f, x, y, ȳ)
```
To illustrate this we will use throughout this document examples for `sin` and for the [logistic sigmoid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logistic_function#Derivative).

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for `sin`</summary>
```
```julia
y = sin(x)
pullback_at(::typeof(sin), x, y, ȳ) = ȳ * cos(x)
```
`pullback_at` uses the primal input `x`, and the sensitivity being pulled back `ȳ`.

```@raw html
</details>
```
```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for the logistic sigmoid</summary>
```

```julia

> σ(x) = 1/(1 + exp(-x))  # = exp(x)/(1+exp(x))

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
σ(x) = 1/(1 + exp(-x))  # = exp(x) / (1 + exp(x))
```

y = σ(x)
pullback_at(::typeof(σ), x, y, ȳ) = ȳ * y * σ(-x)  # i.e. ȳ * σ(x) * σ(-x)
```

> Notice that here we are in the `pullback_at` not only using `x` but also `y` the primal output.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Notice that in `pullback_at` we are not only using input `x` but also using the primal output `y` .
```

This is a nice bit of symmetry that shows up around `exp`.
```@raw html
</details>
```

> 

Author: Maybe we can mess with the CSS?

julia> 3.838 + 4.795
8.633
```
vs computing both together:
```julia
julia> @btime sincos(x) setup=(x=rand());
  6.028 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)
```
```@raw html
</details>
```

What about the logistic sigmoid?
We note that the two values we need are `σ(x)` and `σ(-x)`
If we write these as:
$\sigma(x) = \frac{e^x}{1+e^x}$ and
$\sigma(-x) = \frac{1}{1+e^x}$
then we see they have the common term $e^x$.
`exp(x)` is a much more expensive operation than `+` and `/`.
So we can save time, if we can reuse that `exp(x)`.
```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for the logistic sigmoid</summary>
```
If we have to computing separately:
```julia
julia> @btime 1/(1+exp(x)) setup=(x=rand());
  5.622 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)

julia> @btime 1/(1+exp(-x)) setup=(x=rand());
  6.036 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)

julia> 5.622 + 6.036
11.658
```

vs reusing `exp(x)`:
```julia
julia> @btime exp(x) setup=(x=rand());
  5.367 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)

julia> @btime ex/(1+ex) setup=(ex=exp(rand()));
  1.255 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)

julia> @btime 1/(1+ex) setup=(ex=exp(rand()));
  1.256 ns (0 allocations: 0 bytes)

julia> 5.367 + 1.255 + 1.256
7.878
```
```@raw html
</details>
```

> So we are talking about a 30-40%[^4] speed-up from these optimizations.

Reviewer 5: this sentence doesn't make sense if reading the doc with the `details` collapsed, because you don't know what "these optimizations" refer to. I think this is another reason to ditch the collapsed `details` sections in favour of just having subsections in the doc.

also footnote again:
```suggestion
So we are talking about a 30-40% speed-up from these optimizations.[^4]
```

> It's faster to  compute `sin` and `cos` at the same time via `sincos` than it is to compute them one after the other.

Reviewer 5: new paragraph
```suggestion

It is faster to  compute `sin` and `cos` at the same time via `sincos` than it is to compute them one after the other.
```

And it is faster to reuse the `exp(x)` in computing `σ(x)` and `σ(-x)`.
How can we incorporate this insight into our system?

> We know we can compute both of these in the primal, because they only depend on `x` --- we don't need to know `ȳ`.
> But there is nowhere to put it that is accessible both to the primal pass and the gradient pass code.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We know we can compute both of these in the primal, because they only depend on `x` --- we don't need to know `ȳ`.
But there is nowhere to put it that is accessible both to the primal pass and the gradient pass code.
```
```suggestion
We know we can compute both of these in the primal — because they only depend on `x` and not on `ȳ` — but there is nowhere to put them that is accessible both to the primal pass and the gradient pass code.
```

What if we introduced some variable called `intermediates` that is also recorded onto the tape during the primal pass?
We would need to be able to modify the primal pass to do this, so that we can actually put the data into the `intermediates`.
So we will introduce a function: `augmented_primal`, that will return the primal output plus the `intermediates` that we want to reuse in the gradient pass.
Then we will make our AD system replace calls to the primal with calls to the `augmented_primal` of the primal function and take care of all the bookkeeping.
So that would look like:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
y, intermediates = augmented_primal(f, x)
x̄ = pullback_at(f, x, y, ȳ, intermediates)
```

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for `sin`</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, (; cx=cx)  # use a NamedTuple for the intermediates
end

pullback_at(::typeof(sin), x, y, ȳ, intermediates) = ȳ * intermediates.cx
```
```@raw html
</details>
```

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for the logistic sigmoid</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)

>   y = ex/(1 + ex)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  y = ex / (1 + ex)
```

  return y, (; ex=ex)  # use a NamedTuple for the intermediates
end

> pullback_at(::typeof(σ), x, y, ȳ, intermediates) = ȳ * y /(1 + intermediates.ex)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
pullback_at(::typeof(σ), x, y, ȳ, intermediates) = ȳ * y / (1 + intermediates.ex)
```

```
```@raw html
</details>
```

Cool!
That lets us do what we wanted.
We net decreased the time it takes to run the primal and gradient passes.

> We have now demonstrated the title question of why we needed to be able to modify the primal pass.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We have now demonstrated the title question of why we want to be able to modify the primal pass.
```

> We will go into that more later and have some more usage examples.
> But first let's continue to see how we go from that `augmented_primal` to `pullback_at` to [`rrule`](@ref).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We will go into that more later and have some more usage examples, but first let's continue to see how we go from `augmented_primal` and `pullback_at` to [`rrule`](@ref).
```

One thing we notice when looking at `pullback_at` is it really is starting to have a lot of arguments.

> It had a fair few already, and now we are adding `intermediates` as well.

Reviewer 5: maybe suggest why this is bad ("it's only one more argument, so what?")

```suggestion
It had a fair few already, and now we are adding `intermediates` as well, making it even more unwieldy.
```

> Not to mention this is a fairly simple function, only 1 input, no keyword arguments.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Not to mention these are fairly simple example, the `sin` and `σ` functions have 1 input and no keyword arguments.
```

> Furthermore, we don't even use all of them all the time.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Furthermore, we often don't even use all of the arguments to `pullback_at`.
```

> The original new code for pulling back `sin` no longer needs the `x`, and it never needed `y` (though `sigmoid` does).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The new code for pulling back `sin` — which uses `sincos` and `intermediates` — no longer needs `x`, and it never needed `y` (though sigmoid `σ` does).
```

> The function signature for `pullback_at` was already rather long with the primal inputs and outputs and the sensitivity.
> Now it is even longer since we added `intermediates`.
> Further, storing all all those things on the tape is using up extra memory.

Reviewer 5: we already said this about lots of arguments two sentences ago

```suggestion
And storing all these things on the tape — inputs, outputs, sensitivities, intermediates — is using up extra memory.
```

> What if we generalized the idea of the `intermediate` named tuple, and had a struct that just held anything we might want put on the tape.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
What if we generalized the idea of the `intermediate` named tuple, and had `augmented_primal` return a struct that just held anything we might want put on the tape.
```

```julia
struct PullbackMemory{P, S}
  primal_function::P
  state::S
end
# convenience constructor:
Memory(primal_function; state...) = PullbackMemory(primal_function, state)
# convenience accessor so that `m.x` is same as `m.state.x`
Base.getproperty(m::PullbackMemory, propname) = getproperty(getfield(m, :state), propname)
```

So changing our API we have:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
y, pb = augmented_primal(f, x)
x̄ = pullback_at(pb, ȳ)
```
which is much cleaner.

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for `sin`</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; cx=cx)
end

pullback_at(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(sin)}, ȳ) = ȳ * pb.cx
```
```@raw html
</details>
```

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for the logistic sigmoid</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)

>   y = ex/(1 + ex)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  y = ex / (1 + ex)
```

  return y, PullbackMemory(σ; y=y, ex=ex)
end

> pullback_at(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)}, ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y/(1 + pb.ex)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
pullback_at(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)}, ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y / (1 + pb.ex)
```

```
```@raw html
</details>
```

> I think that looks pretty nice.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
That now looks much simpler; `pullback_at` only ever has 2 arguments.
```

> One way we could make it look a bit nicer for usage is if the `PullbackMemory` was actually a callable object. `pullback_at` only has the 2 arguments.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
One way we could make it nicer to use is by making `PullbackMemory` a callable object.
```

Conceptually the `PullbackMemory` is a fixed thing it the contents of the tape for a particular operation.
It is fully determined by the end of the primal pass.
The during the gradient (reverse) pass the `PullbackMemory` is used to successively compute the `ȳ`  argument.

> So it makes sense to have `PullbackMemory` being a callable object that acts on the sensitivity.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
So it makes sense to make `PullbackMemory` a callable object that acts on the sensitivity.
```

We can do that via call overloading:
```julia
y = f(x)  # primal program
y, pb = augmented_primal(f, x)
x̄ = pb(ȳ)
```

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for `sin`</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; cx=cx)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory)(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.cx
```

```@raw html
</details>
```

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for the logistic sigmoid</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)

>   y = ex/(1 + ex)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  y = ex / (1 + ex)
```

  return y, PullbackMemory(σ; y=y, ex=ex)
end

> (pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)})(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y/(1 + pb.ex)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)})(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y / (1 + pb.ex)
```

```
```@raw html
</details>
```

> Those looking closely will spot what we have done here.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Let's recap what we have done here.
```

> We now have an object (`pb`) that acts on the cotangent of the output of the primal (`ȳ`) to give us the cotangent of the input of the primal function (`x̄`).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We now have an object `pb` that acts on the cotangent of the output of the primal `ȳ` to give us the cotangent of the input of the primal function `x̄`.
```

_`pb` is not just the **memory** of state required for the `pullback`, it **is** the pullback._

> We have one final thing to do.
> Let's think about making the code easy to modify.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We have one final thing to do, which is to think about how we make the code easy to modify.
```

Let's go back and think about the changes we would have make to go from our original way of writing that only used the inputs/outputs, to one that used the intermediate state.

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for `sin`</summary>
```
To rewrite that original formulation in the new pullback form we have:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y = sin(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; x=x)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory)(ȳ) = ȳ * cos(pb.x)
```
To go from that to:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(sin; cx=cx)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory)(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.cx
```
```@raw html
</details>
```

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for the logistic sigmoid</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  y = σ(x)
  return y, PullbackMemory(σ; y=y, x=x)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)})(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y * σ(-pb.x)
```
to get to:
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)
  y = ex/(1 + ex)
  return y, PullbackMemory(σ; y=y, ex=ex)
end
(pb::PullbackMemory{typeof(σ)})(ȳ) = ȳ * pb.y/(1 + pb.ex)
```
```@raw html
</details>
```

> (NB: there is actually a further optimization that can be made to the logistic sigmoid, to avoid remembering two things and just remember one.
> As an exercise to the reader, consider how the code would need to be changed and where.)

Reviewer 5: "exercise to the reader" is a pet peeve of mine.

it sounds such a smart-arse thing to say. At least put the answer in a footnote. Perferably ditch the "exercise to the reader" and just tell us there is a further optimization and put the details in a footnote.

```suggestion
As an aside, there a further optimization that can be made to the logistic sigmoid, to avoid remembering two things and just remember one, but we'll leave the example simple for now.[^FOOTNOTE]
```

Author: Done

> We need to make a series of changes.
> We need to update what work is done in the primal to compute the intermediate values.
> We need to update what was stored in the `PullbackMemory`.
> And we need to update the the function that applies the pullback so it uses the new thing that was stored.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We need to make a series of changes:
 * update what work is done in the primal, to compute the intermediate values.
 * update what is stored in the `PullbackMemory`.
 * update the function that applies the pullback so it uses the new thing that was stored.
```

It's important these parts all stay in sync.
It's not too bad for this simple example with just one or two things to remember.

> For more complicated multi-argument functions, like will be talked about below, you often end up needing to remember half a dozen things, like sizes and indices relating to each input/output.
> So it gets a little more fiddly to make sure you remember all the things you need to and give them the same name in both places.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For more complicated multi-argument functions, which we will show below, you often end up needing to remember half a dozen things, like sizes and indices relating to each input/output, so it gets a little more fiddly to make sure you remember all the things you need to and give them the same name in both places.
```

> _Is there a way we can automatically just have all the things we use remembered for us?_
> 
> Surprisingly for such a specific request, there actually is.
> This is a closure.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
_Is there a way we can automatically just have all the things we use remembered for us?_
Surprisingly for such a specific request, there actually is: a closure.

```

A closure in Julia is a callable structure that automatically contains a field for every object from its parent scope that is used in its body.

> There are [incredible ways to abuse this](https://invenia.github.io/blog/2019/10/30/julialang-features-part-1#closures-give-us-classic-object-oriented-programming); but here we can in-fact use closures exactly as they are intended.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
There are [incredible ways to abuse this](https://invenia.github.io/blog/2019/10/30/julialang-features-part-1#closures-give-us-classic-object-oriented-programming); but here we can use closures exactly as they are intended.
```

Replacing `PullbackMemory` with a closure that works the same way lets us avoid having to manually control what is remembered _and_ lets us avoid separately writing the call overload.

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for `sin`</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(sin), x)
  y, cx = sincos(x)
  pb = ȳ -> cx * ȳ  # pullback closure. closes over `cx`
  return y, pb
end
```
```@raw html
</details>
```

```@raw html
<details><summary>Example for the logistic sigmoid</summary>
```
```julia
function augmented_primal(::typeof(σ), x)
  ex = exp(x)

>   y = ex/(1 + ex)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  y = ex / (1 + ex)
```

>   pb = ȳ -> ȳ * y/(1 + ex)  # pullback closure. closes over `y` and `ex`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  pb = ȳ -> ȳ * y / (1 + ex)  # pullback closure. closes over `y` and `ex`
```
